# Supplementary results

## The cephalic furrow invagination is disrupted in weak phenotypes

The cephalic furrow of prd mutants is delayed but forms at the expected
position in the body axis that matches the eve stripe 1 [@prdpaper]. We
analyzed cell and tissue behaviors in prd mutants. We found that initiator cell
behavior is present, timely and possibly expanded. However, the process of
cephalic furrow invagination does not progress normally. The tissue halts
midway only to buckle abruptly when the mitotic domains appear. Despite the
similar outcome, a cephalic epithelial fold, we note that this fold is not
formed through the usual process of invagination (which is disrupted). We
observe a similar phenomenon in gt mutants.

<!--TODO: ROI showing initiator cell behavior in prd and gt-->

<!--TODO: Plot showing interrupted invagination and subsequent buckling.-->

![Disrupted invagination process in weak cephalic furrow
mutants.](../2-figures/invagination-mutants.png){#fig:invagination-mutants
width=100%}

![Row of initiator cells is wider in prd mutants. Whole mount HCR in situs
showing the disrupted patterning of adjacent cells and wider row of
eve-expressing cells.](../2-figures/prd-mutant.png){#fig:prd-mutant width=100%}

## Cephalic furrow directs flow in tissue shear zone of the head-trunk boundary

<!--TODO: Tissue flow in btd and eve mutants-->

We analyzed the tissue flows and cell shape changes in mutants that fail to
initiate the cephalic furrow. We observe opposite tissue flows from the head
and trunk with a clear boundary region characterized by cells with low
circularity and greater distance to neighbors.

<!--TODO: Figure with laser ablations around the cephalic furrow area-->

Cephalic furrow invagination actively increases tissue tension. Using laser
ablations near the initiator cells we identified that there is an increase in
tension in an area of about 40 µm anterior and posterior.

![Tissue flow and cell shape analysis at the head-trunk boundary interface in
cephalic furrow mutants.](../2-figures/shear-zone.png){#fig:shear-zone width=100%}

We analyzed the tissue flows in cephalic furrow mutants in using PIV analysis.
In wild type embryogenesis the region of the head--trunk boundary shows a
characteristic pattern at the onset of gastrulation (before germ band extension
and mitotic domains). There is a strong flow towards the ventral region at the
lateral epithelium due to the ventral furrow invagination, while the head
tissues and dorsal trunk tissues have no direction. Once the cephalic furrow
initiates it directs the flow towards ventral of the dorsal tissues and a
clockwise flow pattern in the head, with dorsal tissues moving posteriorly and
ventrally while ventral head tissues move anteriorly and dorsally. The center
of the hurricane sits at the ventral portion of the head region just anterior
to the cephalic furrow. In the absence of the cephalic furrow, the ventral flow
is restricted to more posterior trunk tissues, while head tissues show more
variable directions despite also flowing dorsally. We also observe shear
effects to epithelial cells in cephalic furrow mutants. Once gastrulation
proceeds we observe an increased flow and a stronger tissue flow towards the
anterior due to the germ band elongation. These analysis show the flow pattern
is disrupted in cephalic furrow mutants and the head--trunk boundary as a
convergent zone.

## btd mutants show initiator cell behaviors

<!--Initiator cell behavior in btd mutant-->

We analyzed the cellular behaviors in cephalic furrow mutants. While eve
mutants show no initiator cell behaviors, we observe reminiscent cell shape
changes in btd mutants. In wild type embryos, the apices of initiator cell are
tightly coupled to the apices of adjacent cells when they begin shortening
(@fig:reminiscent-initiators). The adjacent and neighbor cells form a small
epithelial indentation below the vitelline envelope. The width of this
indentation remains roughly the same during the cephalic furrow invagination.
The cells that sink into the invagination converge at this indentation point.

In btd mutants, known for not having a furrow, show a reminiscent behavior
previously undescribed. btd embryos do not show the tight apical connection
between initiators and adjacent cells, but it does show an epithelial
indentation (@fig:reminiscent-initiators). This indentation is delayed and
wider in relation to the wild type morphogenesis. While the cells shorten in
height, the indentation widens with cells detaching from the vitelline
envelope. Until the two sides of the invagination collapse together and mitotic
divisions occur in the invaginated cells.

<!--TODO: Measure the width of the indentation across time.-->

<!--These data indicates that cell behaviors that occur in wild type cephalic furrow formation are still occurring in btd mutants. This suggests the molecular patterning of surrounding cells are still occurring independent of btd, and that the initiator cell behavior is a coordinated composite of cellular behaviors.-->

![Reminiscent initiator cell behavior in btd
mutants.](../2-figures/reminiscent-initiators.png){#fig:reminiscent-initiators
width=100%}

<!--TODO: Cell shape changes in btd mutant-->

We observe cell shape changes as well. The live-imaging data revealed that btd
mutants exhibit reminiscent initiator cell behaviors at the head-trunk
interface which occur before any of the tissue flows. After the tissue flows,
we see a range of cell shape changes with compression on both sides and a
shearing effect at the boundary.

## prd is a key cephalic furrow gene

In addition, we analyzed *prd* embryos where the formation of the cephalic
furrow is delayed [@Blankenship2001-tm]. Although *prd* embryos seem to form a
cephalic furrow at the expected position, our live imaging reveals the process
of invagination initiates but halts mid way through (Figure X). Analyses of the
dynamics and area of folded tissue shows the folding is *prd* embryos is more
similar to the ectopic folds than to the cephalic furrow invagination (Figure
X). This suggests the lack of *prd* activity is more important to the
patterning of the cephalic furrow than previously thought.

## Molecular arrangements of btd, eve, prd and gt

<!--TODO: Include slp or not?-->

![Molecular arrangements in the cephalic furrow are
disrupted in btd mutants. Whole mount HCR in situs showing the altered
patterning of eve, slp and prd in the adjacent cells, and the narrower
invagination area between slp-positive cells in the outer
edges.](../2-figures/btd-mutant.png){#fig:btd-mutant width=100%}

## Cauterization of initiator cells to block the cephalic furrow

**Supplementary:** *Blocking the cephalic furrow in wild type causes ectopic
buckling.* If an excess of epithelia in association with mitotic domains and
germ band compression, we expect that by blocking the cephalic furrow, we would
find ectopic folding occurring in the epithelia. We blocked the cephalic furrow
invagination by cauterizing the row of initiator cells. We find the prediction
holds.

## Active pull drives cephalic furrow invagination during normal embryogenesis

<!--Laser ablations in wild type suggest active CF-->

To understand the mechanical properties of the tissues surrounding the cephalic
furrow, we first quantified the force the cephalic furrow creates during the
invagination process using laser ablations. We measured the recoil velocity in
the epithelium anterior and posterior to the cephalic furrow (Figure laser
ablation illustration). We find the recoil velocity of cell membranes decrease
with the distance to the initiator cells (Figure panel laser ablation). The
recoil velocity becomes negligible at a distance of 40 µm from the initiator
cells. This indicates the invagination of the cephalic furrow actively pulls
the epithelial cells at the onset of gastrulation within a region 80 µm wide of
the head--trunk blastoderm.

## Mitotic domains and germ band interactions in wild type

The finding that the germ band extension interacts with head tissues, led us to
ask whether the invagination of the cephalic furrow in wild type embryogenesis
is also pushed by the germ band elongation. Historical observations already
suggested that mitotic domains and the germ band could contribute to the
cephalic furrow invagination [@Campos-Ortega1997-rd], and a recent work shows
the completion of the ventral furrow depends on the physical push from the
adjacent ectoderm [@Guo2021-sj]. To understand how the germ band extension
interacts with the cephalic furrow formation, we performed laser ablations and
cauterizations in wild type at different locations in the embryo.

## Analyses of mitotic domain single mutants

**[Hypothetical outcome]** We then investigated whether the local expansion
caused by mitotic domains could influence the depth of the cephalic furrow. We
measured the depth of the cephalic furrow in *stg* mutants. We find initial
invagination of the cephalic furrow in *stg* mutants shows no differences in
depth from control embryos. We also observe an anterior shift in the cephalic
furrow position in *stg* embryos. This anterior shift coincides with the
progression of the germ band towards the head region which lacks the expansion
of head tissues due to the absence of mitotic domains.

## Cauterization of wild type indicate mild GB to CF depth

We then tested whether the force generated by the germ band extension
contributes to the cephalic furrow invagination. We blocked the germ band
elongation in wild type embryos using our cauterization approach and measured
the depth of the cephalic furrow invagination. We find the cephalic furrow in
cauterized embryos is about 10% shallower than non-cauterized embryos
(@fig:wildcauts). This indicates a mild influence of the germ band extension in
the process of cephalic furrow invagination.

<!--Curiously, if the cauterization is unequal, the depth of the cephalic furrow on the left and right side are different. -->

## Cephalic furrow is mostly autonomous but interactions matter

Overall, these results show that in normal embryogenesis the morphogenesis of
the cephalic is mainly driven by itself, specified and mediated genetically and
autonomously, with the mitotic domains and germ band extension contributing a
minor role in pushing the cephalic furrow. However, we observe that when the
mitotic domains are absent, or the germ band extension is blocked, the tissue
dynamics at the head--trunk boundary are affected. We thus suggest the cephalic
furrow morphogenesis is largely governed by the orchestration of genetic
patterning with a minor role of the mechanical forces in the embryo.

# Head-trunk boundary is a tissue shear zone of conflict tissue flow

<!--Possible CF interactions in normal embryogenesis-->

The interactions of the cephalic furrow with other morphogenetic movements are
not well studied. Our data reveals evidence that the germ band could have a
role in the cephalic furrow formation during normal embryogenesis while pushing
the tissue deeper in the yolk, similar to what has been described for ventral
furrow [@ref]. Thus suggesting a global interaction between morphogenetic
movements in gastrulation.

# Previous results with MD and double mutants

We analyzed the possibility that mitotic domains---groups of blastoderm cells
that divide in synchrony during mitotic cycle 14 [@Foe1989-cw]---are involved
in the formation of ectopic folds in cephalic furrow mutants. Previous
observations suggest that force imbalance between mitotic domains [@Ko2020-wk]
and forces generated by mitotic expansion [@Gupta2021-oo] can influence
adjacent tissue and play a role in tissue buckling. Mitotic rounding can induce
invagination [@Kondo2013-gy]. We observe a correlation between the position of
ectopic folds at the head--trunk interface in cephalic furrow mutants, with the
position of mitotic domains. That is, ectopic folds often form adjacent to or
in between mitotic domains ({@fig:mitotic}B,C).

*btd* embryos show ectopic folds in four distinct locations, either anterior or
posterior to the canonical cephalic furrow position. They can form between MD1
and MD9/MD5, between MD5 and MD7, between MD7 and MD6, and posterior to MD6
({@fig:mitotic}B). *eve* embryos show a similar pattern of folding events
except for lacking ectopic folds between MD7 and MD6. The difference can be
related to the fact that *btd* embryos lack MD2 [@Edgar1994-pi] while *eve*
mutants have an expanded MD2 [@Vincent1997-fa].

The timing of tissue buckling coincides with the expansion of apical cell area
in mitotic domains. The expansion occurs when a group of epithelial cells round
up during anaphase which increases their apical area. The expansion precedes
ectopic folding and the position of buckling occurs in the adjacent
non-dividing epithelial cells ({@fig:mitotic}B). The tissue folds inwards
forming an ectopic fold which partially contains the area of adjacent mitotic
domains ({@fig:mitotic}B). The buckling occurs abruptly with the compression of
non-dividing cells caused by the cell rounding in mitotic domains
({@fig:mitotic}B), in contrast to the progressive invagination characteristic
of the normal cephalic furrow (Video 6).

These observations suggest the formation of mitotic domains influence the
formation of ectopic folds in *btd* and *eve* mutants. However, it was not
clear whether the mitotic expansion are the sole drivers responsible for the
formation of ectopic folds. To test whether mitotic domains are sufficient to
form ectopic folds, we generated double mutant embryos lacking both the
cephalic furrow and the mitotic domains by combining our fluorescent strains
carrying the loss of function alleles for *btd* and *eve* with a loss of
function allele for *stg*, a gene that regulates the formation of mitotic
domains in the nuclear cycle 14 [@Edgar1989-hv].

Live imaging of *stg*--*btd* and *stg*--*eve* double mutants reveals that
ectopic folds occur at the head--trunk interface despite the absence of mitotic
domains ({@fig:mitotic}C). The distribution of folding events, however, differs
from the single mutant embryos ({@fig:mitotic}C). This indicates the forces
generated by the mitotic domains might facilitate or bias the position of
folding events, but that other mechanical forces are responsible for driving
the tissue buckling at the head--trunk interface of *btd* and *eve* mutants.

Two observations led us to consider the formation of ectopic folds could be
driven by the germ band extension. First, the analysis of tissue flows during
gastrulation show the head--trunk boundary is a convergent zone where tissues
from the head and from the trunk collide on the dorsal side, mainly due to the
the mitotic domains and germ band extension, respectively ({@fig:mitotic}D).
Second, we observed the tissue at the interface between MD6 and the germ band
is more compressed in *btd* mutants, suggesting the germ band extension is
compressing the epithelial cells in this region ({@fig:mitotic}E). To test
whether the germ band is the driving force for the formation of ectopic folds,
we mechanically block the germ band extension in *btd* and *eve* mutants by
cauterizing the blastoderm tissue to the vitelline envelope at the onset of
gastrulation ({@fig:cauterization}A).

When we block the germ band extension, the mutant embryos show
no ectopic folds at the head--trunk boundary (Video 5). In contrast to the
folds present in the epithelium of *btd* and *eve* mutants, the epithelium in
cauterized embryos does not show folds and most cell apices are close to the
vitelline envelope ({@fig:cauterization}B,C, Video 6). We quantified the
deformations in the head--trunk epithelium from the onset of gastrulation
between non-cauterized and cauterized mutant embryos. We find the tortuosity of
the epithelium increases over time in non-cauterized mutants significantly more
than in cauterized mutants ({@fig:cauterization}D,E). The mitotic domains are
still present and compress the non-dividing cells at the head--trunk boundary
({@fig:cauterization}D), but this compression is insufficient to cause the
tissue to buckle ({@fig:cauterization}B,C). These experiments reveal the
driving force for the formation of ectopic folds in cephalic furrow mutants is
the compression of trunk tissues caused by the elongating germ band. 

<!--TODO: Estimate the expansion of head tissues in cauterized embryo-->

<!--These experiments indicate that neither the expansion of head tissues caused by the mitotic domains, nor the compression of head tissues driven by the germ band extension alone are sufficient to cause the epithelium to buckle. But when both processes occur concomitantly, the blastoderm will inevitably buckle.-->

<!--When mitotic domains are present, the dividing cells generate areas prone to buckling, which bias the formation of ectopic folds. However, the germ band extension is what drives the formation of ectopic folds.-->

<!--Local tissue strain and global stiffness modulate ectopic folding-->

We tested how the mitotic strain might bias the position of folding and how the
mechanical force from the germ band leads to tissue buckling by developing a 1D
linear model. **[Hypothetical outcome]** To complement our in vivo observations
and understand the interplay between local and global tissue interactions, we
developed a 1D linear model that represents the epithelium of a gastrulating
embryo. We adapted a previous model and reached the set of parameters that
reproduced epithelial behavior in different conditions in vivo. We first tested
whether local tissue strain generated by mitotic expansion would cause ectopic
folds and found it does. However, the formation of ectopic folds depend on
global stiffness of the tissue, and below a certain threshold no ectopic folds
form (@fig:model).

# Background discarded paragraphs and sentences

<!--Gastrulation is a fundamental event in animal development-->
Gastrulation is a key moment in development. Some animals do it simply, others
have an elaborate orchestration of tissue movements. The fly *Drosophila
melanogaster* has a derived and complex gastrulation process with several
concomitant invaginations, cell and morphogenetic processes, and tissue flows
across the embryo [@RefFlyGastrulation].
<!--Fly gastrulation is highly derived, complex and fascinating-->

<!--Invaginations and movements are well-understood-->
When Drosophila embryos gastrulate, a ventral invagination segregates
mesodermal tissues and gives rise to muscles, anterior and posterior
invaginations give rise to the foregut and hindgut at both ends of the
digestive tube, and the germ band extension quickly performs the axis
elongation of the embryo. Among these processes, however, there is one whose
function remains mysterious despite its prominent position in the embryo---the
cephalic furrow.
<!--Except for the cephalic furrow which remains mysterious-->

The evolution of bilateral symmetry revolutionized animal diversity. A major
aspect of bilaterian success was the separation between anterior and posterior
body domains, which provided the grounds for the functional specialization of
sensory structures in the head and locomotory appendages in the trunk. The head
and trunk identities are specified early in embryonic development through a
remarkably conserved regulatory landscape [@Holland1988-ii; @McGinnis1992-qj;
@Simeone1992-ny], suggesting that the mechanisms establishing the head--trunk
distinction are ancient and crucial to understand the evolution of bilaterians
[@Bruce1998-ek]. 

Even though the patterning and morphogenesis of the cephalic furrow remains
poorly understood [@Gilmour2017-um].

Its transient nature makes the cephalic furrow particularly challenging to
investigate, and partly the reason why only a few mutants have been identified. 

Overall, this work contributes to our understanding about the global physical
interactions that orchestrate the intricate and fascinating morphogenetic
movements of *Drosophila* gastrulation.

Interestingly, in *eve* embryos where the cephalic furrow fails to invaginate,
a late fold appears in the cephalic region [@Vincent1997-fa]. The origin of
this late fold is unclear whether it is a reminiscent of the cephalic furrow
patterning or formed by other developmental mechanisms. Thus, the physical role
in the global dynamics of *Drosophila* gastrulation remains poorly understood.

This process remains poorly known [@Gilmour2017-um; @Vincent1997-fa].

Mutants for either *btd* or *eve* fail to initiate the cephalic furrow
[@Vincent1997-fa]. 

A patterning that can be achieved with only four genes [@Dubuis2013-jf].

The main genes associated with cephalic furrow development are *buttonhead*
(*btd*), *even skipped* (*eve*), and *paired* (*prd*). In *btd* and *eve*
embryos the cephalic furrow fails to initiate the process of invagination
[@Vincent1997-fa], while in *prd* embryos the cephalic furrow formation is
delayed [@Blankenship2001-tm]. However, it remains unclear how the absence or
delay in cephalic furrow formation impacts the local tissue interactions at the
head--trunk boundary.

Cephalic furrow is genetically-defined with a precise stereotypic timing and
position. The invagination is large extending from dorsal to ventral and deep
sinking almost the whole yolk invagination at an important anatomical landmark
of the embryo, the head--trunk boundary. Yet, the cephalic furrow, unlike the
ventral furrow, does not give rise to a particular cell fates and is transient,
this massive structure progressively unfolds before germ band retraction. These
features, being a major but transient structure make the cephalic furrow one of
the most enigmatic morphogenetic movements in *Drosophila* gastrulation
(@fig:headtrunk).

Cephalic furrow directs convergent tissue flow preventing epithelial
deformations at the head--trunk boundary.

We find that embryos that fail to initiate the cephalic furrow form late
ectopic folds at the head--trunk interface. These ectopic folds differ from the
cephalic furrow in timing, formation dynamics, folded area, and morphology. The
number and position of ectopic folds across the anteroposterior axis varies
between individual mutant embryos. We show the timing and position of ectopic
folds correlates with the formation of mitotic domains, suggesting that local
tissue interactions are causing the tissue to buckle. These local interactions,
however, are not sufficient to generate ectopic folds. Using laser
cauterizations to mechanically block the germ band extension, we show the
occurrence of ectopic folds at the head--trunk boundary depends on the global
tissue compression caused by the germ band extension, and that this interaction
also contributes to the cephalic furrow formation in normal embryogenesis.

*Drosophila* gastrulation is complex and highly dynamic. The various
morphogenetic movements begin almost simultaneously. The ventral furrow, the
midgut invaginations, and the cephalic furrow. To capture the consequences

In normal development, the overlap between *btd* and *eve* is required to
specify the initiator cells of the cephalic furrow; in mutants, the
invagination fails to form [@Vincent1997-fa].

To gain insight into the role of the cephalic furrow during gastrulation, we
analyzed the head-trunk boundary in mutants that lack this invagination. For
this, we generated fluorescent fly lines with loss-of-function alleles of genes
known to play a role in cephalic furrow formation, and imaged the embryos *in
toto* under high-temporal resolution using lightsheet microscopy.

and a fluorescent membrane marker [GAP43-mCherry, @Martin2010-pb].

The presence of ectopic folds in both *btd* and *eve* raised the possibility
that this phenotype is associated with the absence of the cephalic furrow in
these embryos. We thus characterize the distribution and dynamics of ectopic
fold formation to understand the processes causing the head--trunk tissue to
fold in cephalic furrow mutants.

We manually traced individual folds and extracted tortuosity measurements,
angle displacement, folded area, and location along the anteroposterior axis.


The cephalic furrow is an enigmatic tissue fold that forms at the head--trunk
boundary of *Drosophila* during gastrulation.

It forms at a key anatomical landmark in the embryo, the head--trunk boundary.

The cephalic furrow is a deep tissue fold that forms at the head--trunk
boundary of *Drosophila* during gastrulation.

Its formation is under strict genetic control.

It divides the head--trunk boundary.

It forms at the onset of gastrulation.

Its function remains a mystery.

The cephalic furrow invaginates.

The ectopic folds buckle.

it can even differ between the left and right side of the same embryo ({@fig:dynamics}H).

The difference can be related to the fact that *btd* embryos lack MD2 [@Edgar1994-pi] while *eve* mutants have an expanded MD2 [@Vincent1997-fa].

The invagination unfolds and vanishes without a trace.

The function of the cephalic furrow during embryogenesis remains a mystery.

Because it vanishes without a trace, the function of the cephalic furrow
remains a mystery.


# Abstract

The cephalic furrow is a deep epithelial fold that forms at the head--trunk
boundary of *Drosophila* during gastrulation. Its formation is under strict
genetic control but, unlike other embryonic invaginations, the cephalic furrow
does not give rise to any precursor tissues or larval structures. It unfolds
and vanishes without a trace. Here we investigate if the cephalic furrow plays
a mechanical role in gastrulation. We imaged mutant embryos live to understand
how the lack of the cephalic furrow impacts the tissue dynamics at the
head--trunk interface. We find that without the cephalic furrow, the monolayer
epithelium will buckle erratically, forming ectopic folds during gastrulation.
We show that ectopic folds are caused by extrinsic tissue forces which are
driven by the concomitant expansion of mitotic domains in the head, and by the
extension of the germ band in the trunk. Our experimental and modeling data
suggests that these opposed tissue flows inevitably increase the mechanical
stress at the head--trunk boundary, a condition exacerbated in cephalic furrow
mutants due to the excess of tissue on the blastoderm surface. The cephalic
furrow counteracts these physical interactions by priming the position of
folding, and creating a predictable temporary storage of epithelial tissue
before the mitotic expansions and germ band extension. We thus propose the
cephalic furrow plays a mechanical role in *Drosophila* gastrulation acting as
a buffer and preventing epithelial instability at the head--trunk boundary.


The cephalic furrow is a deep epithelial invagination that demarcates the
head--trunk boundary of *Drosophila* during gastrulation. Unlike other
embryonic invaginations, the cephalic furrow is a transient structure that
vanishes without giving rise to any particular tissues. It thus remains unclear
what role this prominent embryonic landmark plays in the embryo. Here we
investigate whether the cephalic furrow plays a physical role in *Drosophila*
embryogenesis. Using live-imaging of mutant embryos we analyze how defects in
cephalic furrow formation impact the tissue flows during gastrulation. We find
that, in the absence of the cephalic furrow, the head--trunk interface becomes
deformed and forms erratic ectopic folds. We show that these folds are the
result of extrinsic forces driven by the formation of mitotic domains and the
extension of the germ band, and that, in the absence of the cephalic furrow,
the opposing flows between head and trunk increase the mechanical stress in the
monolayer epithelium. We thus propose that the formation of the cephalic furrow
buffers these physical interactions at the head--trunk boundary, and thus
prevent epithelial instabilities during *Drosophila* gastrulation.
