---
title: Cephalic furrow prevents epithelial instability at the head--trunk boundary of *Drosophila*
author: #TODO: Use author filter https://github.com/pandoc/lua-filters/tree/master/scholarly-metadata
- Bruno C. Vellutini, Marina B. Cuenca, Carl D. Modes, Pavel Tomancak
- Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics
- Pfotenhauerstra√üe 108, 01307 Dresden, Germany
documentclass: article
bibliography: furrow.bib
csl: elife.csl
papersize: a4
fontsize: 11pt
fontfamily: libertine
linestretch: 1
geometry:
- bindingoffset=2mm
- hmargin=25mm
- vmargin=25mm
link-citations: true
colorlinks: true
fignos-warning-level: 0
...

<!--TODO: Auto naming for figures, if needed

fignos-cleveref: True
fignos-plus-name: Figure
tablenos-cleveref: True
tablenos-plus-name: Table

-->

<!--TODO: Consider alternative titles.

- Cephalic furrow invagination prevents epithelial instability at the
head-trunk boundary during *Drosophila* gastrulation

- Cephalic furrow morphogenesis requires coordinated genetic and physical
interactions during *Drosophila* gastrulation

- Physical role of the cephalic furrow during *Drosophila* gastrulation

- Physical interplay between cephalic furrow and germ band during *Drosophila*
gastrulation

- Genetic and mechanical Integration of genetic and mechanical forces in the
cephalic furrow morphogenesis

- Integration of mechanical and morphogenetic forces driving cephalic furrow
formation gastrulation in *Drosophila*-->


# Abstract

The cephalic furrow is a deep invagination that demarcates the head--trunk
boundary of Drosophila during gastrulation. Despite being a prominent trait,
the cephalic furrow is transient and does not give rise to specific tissues in
the embryo, and its function in gastrulation remains elusive. Here, we
investigate the morphogenesis and developmental role of the cephalic furrow by
analyzing known and newly-identified mutants under lightsheet microscopy. We
find that embryos that fail to initiate the cephalic furrow---*btd* and *eve*
mutants---invariably form late ectopic folds at the head--trunk interface. This
stochastic tissue buckling is driven by a conjunction of local and global
tissue forces---the expansion of apical area in mitotic domains and the
compression of tissues adjacent to the elongating germ band, respectively. Our
findings suggest the cephalic furrow can prevent epithelial instability by
priming a predictable position of folding at the head--trunk boundary.

# Introduction

<!--The head--trunk boundary is an ancient and essential trait for the evolution of bilaterians.-->

<!--- What is the cephalic furrow-->
<!--- The physical role of the cephalic furrow-->
<!--- Late folds in eve mutants is the trigger-->
<!--- What we did, what we found.-->

<!--The cephalic furrow-->

The cephalic furrow is a unique morphogenetic movement of Drosophila
gastrulation. It is a deep invagination that appear as lateral indentations at
the onset of Drosophila gastrulation [@ClassicalFurrow]. Unlike the ventral
furrow, it begins with a single row of initiator cells that sink into the yolk
[@Cite]. The process occurs through a coordinated series of cell shape changes
and tissue movements, beginning with the shortening of initiator cells, basal
expansion and tissue invagination [@Spencer]. This process is highly
stereotypic and coordinated in time and space suggesting precise regulation.

<!--Cephalic furrow patterning-->

Indeed, the cephalic furrow position is highly stereotypic with 1% precision
[@CFprecision]. A patterning that could be achieved with only four genes
[@CFgenes]. Insofar, only two genes have been implicated in the patterning of
the cephalic furrow---buttonhead (btd) and even-skipped (eve) [@Vincent]. The
overlap between btd and eve stripe 1 demarcates and specifies the initiator
cells that initiate the cephalic furrow [@Vincent]. The genetic patterning,
however, is noisy and the tight coupling of morphogenetic feedback is necessary
to achieve a single precise row of initiator cells [@Eritano].

<!--Cephalic furrow mechanics-->

The cephalic furrow is a prominent invagination covering from dorsal to ventral
and subdividing the yolk from head and trunk almost entirely. Because the
cephalic furrow is a transient structure that unfolds after a couple of hours,
and because it is not associated with any particular cell or tissue fate in the
embryo, its function has remained elusive. Modeling simulations have suggested
the cephalic furrow can act as an anchor to the tissue separating the head from
trunk [@ModelSimulation]. But it is not clear and the interactions with other
gastrulation movements have not been investigated [@Kong].

<!--Late ectopic fold spark-->

We decided to investigate the putative developmental roles of the cephalic
furrow by analyzing the consequences of the absence of the cephalic furrow to
gastrulation as a whole by analyzing cephalic furrow mutant which fail to
initiate the cephalic furrow. One intriguing observation is the finding that
eve mutants which fail to specify initiator cells, and to form a cephalic
furrow, form late ectopic folds near the native cephalic furrow position
[@Vincent]. To better understand the origin of these late folds, and
investigate whether these feature was common to other cephalic furrow mutants,
we analyzed btd and eve mutants that fail to initiate the furrow under
live-imaging lightsheet microscopy.

<!--Here, we investigate the morphogenesis and developmental role of the cephalic furrow by analyzing known and newly-identified mutants under lightsheet microscopy. -->

<!--Summary of findings end of intro-->

<!--TODO: Continue from here.-->

We find that embryos that fail to initiate the cephalic furrow---*btd* and
*eve* mutants---invariably form late ectopic folds at the head--trunk
interface. These ectopic folds are variable between individual mutant embryos.
We find the position and timing of folding events correlates with mitotic
domains. The epithelium folds in regions compressed between the expanding
dividing cells. Instead of a progressive invagination of the tissue, the
ectopic folds form by an abrupt buckling of the epithelium, suggesting that
local tissue forces might cause the tissue to buckle. Interestingly, the total
area of folded tissue is similar between mutant embryos, independent of the
number of folds, suggesting that global mechanical forces might also regulate
ectopic folding.

We tested whether local forces caused by mitotic domains are sufficient to
cause ectopic foldings in cephalic furrow mutants by blocking the germ band
extension. Cauterized mutants do not form ectopic folds, suggesting that the
global tissue compression caused by the germ band extension is the main force
that leads to ectopic folding. We then tested whether the mitotic domains,
either by area expansion or by destabilizing the epithelia, are required or
simply facilitate ectopic folding events, by analysing double mutants. Double
mutants do not form ectopic folds, suggesting that it is the coordination of
local and global mechanical forces that lead to the formation of ectopic folds.

<!--Ectopic folds without mitotic domains suggests that folding is inevitable (no need for excess theory).-->

<!--No ectopic folding without mitotic domains suggests that it is the coordinated expansion of dividing cells and tissue compression from the germ band that lead to ectopic folding.-->

Next we asked whether the germ band extension (and mitotic domains) contribute
to the normal process of invagination of the cephalic furrow. We find that
cauterized wild type embryos have a shallower cephalic furrow, indicating that
the tissue compression from the germ band influences the amount of invaginated
cephalic tissue.

Our data shows that under normal embryogenesis, given the expansions of cell
area of mitotic domains in the head and the epithelial compression of the germ
band elongation in the trunk, the epithelia will inevitably buckle. Therefore,
what the cephalic furrow accomplishes during gastrulation is to prime the
timing and position of the folding. The result is a predictable structure for
an inevitable invagination, possibly avoiding the potential negative effects of
erratic epithelial buckling. Overall, the morphogenesis of the cephalic furrow
is a two-step composite process integrating an active, genetically-defined
process of invagination, and a passive tissue buckling driven by the germ band
extension.

# Results

## Cephalic furrow mutants form ectopic folds at the head--trunk boundary

<!--Ectopic folds occur in CF mutants-->




We analyzed embryos that fail to initiate the cephalic furrow under
live-imaging to understand how the absence of the cephalic furrow impacts
gastrulation. btd and eve are two key genes required for the specification of
the initiator cells [@Vincent]. It was known that eve mutants form a late fold,
but its origins remain unclear. We find that not only eve mutants, but also btd
mutants, which fail to initiate the cephalic furrow, invariably form ectopic
epithelial folds at the head--trunk interface (Figure @fig:ectopic-folding). We
analyzed them to understand what is causing the formation of this folds, a
reminiscent activity from the cephalic furrow patterning or a consequence of
mechanical forces during gastrulation.

<!--Ectopic folds are delayed relative to CF formation-->

The formation of ectopic folds is delayed in relation to the native cephalic
furrow. While the cephalic furrow initiates at the onset of gastrulation in
wild type embryos (stage 6), the ectopic folds in btd and eve mutants appear
once the germ band has already progressed about X% (stage 8) (Figure
@fig:ectopic-folding, Video 1 and 2).

## Ectopic fold formation and morphology differs from the cephalic furrow

<!--Morphology of ectopic folds differ from CF invagination-->

The morphology of the ectopic folds differ from the wild type invagination. The
folded tissue is less symmetric than the cephalic furrow, the cleft at the
leading edges of the fold is wider, and the typical cell type structure is
absent, for example, wedge shape at the invagination tip, the orthogonal
position of middle cells, and the elongated morphology at the leading edges are
absent (Figure @fig:ectopic-folding).

<!--Progression of ectopic folds differ from CF formation-->

The dynamics of ectopic fold formation also differs from the cephalic furrow
invagination. While the cephalic furrow initiates as a straight lateral line
and progressively performs a dorsal posterior shift, a ventral anterior shift,
and a shape bending into a curved line, the ectopic folds are mostly straight
and do not undergo a determined patterned shift or shape change (Figure
@fig:ectopic-variability).

<!--Ectopic folding area smaller than CF invagination area-->

The area of folded tissue in ectopic folds differ from the cephalic furrow
invagination. We measured the total area of folded tissue and find it is
roughly half the size of a regular wild type cephalic furrow. There is a
minimum value of invaginated tissues in mutant embryos (Figure
@fig:ectopic-variability).

<!--Depth of ectopic folds is smaller than CF depth-->

In addition, we measured the depth of ectopic folds compared to the cephalic
furrow. We found similarly that the maximum depth of ectopic folds is about
half of the cephalic furrow invagination @fig:ectopic-variability).

<!--The shape of folds is different as evidenced by a local curvature plot.-->

## Ectopic folding is variable among individual mutant embryos

<!--Ectopic folds vary between individual mutant embryos-->

To understand the causes of ectopic folding in btd and eve mutants, we imaged
and analyzed different mutant individuals to see if ectopic folds form at
regular positions and timing. We find that the formation dynamics and position
of these ectopic folds is variable between individual mutant embryos (Figure
@fig:ectopic-variability). Even between left and right side of the same embryo.
This suggest they are driven by patterning, or if they are stochastic, which
suggest they are driven by mechanical forces. 

<!--TODO: Include panel with left-right differences-->

<!--Position of ectopic folding is biased-->

<!--TODO: Find a good plot to demonstrate this-->

The ectopic folds can occur near the canonical cephalic furrow position, but it
also forms in at least one more anterior site and two more posterior positions.
In btd mutants, the ectopic folds near the canonical cephalic furrow position.
The ectopic folds in eve mutants also occur in the anterior and canonical
positions, but the more posterior folds occur more dorsally compared to btd.

<!--Compensation of tissue compression-->

We observe that individual mutant embryos can have the same total invaginated
area either having one deep fold or two shallower folds.

## Ectopic folding coincides with the formation of mitotic domains

<!--Ectopic folds appear between mitotic domains-->

To understand what influences the position and timing of ectopic folding, we
analyzed the placement of these events in relation to epithelial features. We
find a correlation between the formation of ectopic folds with the position and
timing of mitotic domains at the head--trunk interface (Figure
@fig:mitotic-domains). The ectopic folds in btd and eve mutants are often
positioned between adjacent mitotic domains (Figure @fig:mitotic-domains).

<!--Ectopic folding coincides with area expansion of dividing cells-->

The epithelial cells that fold are being compressed by the expansion of
dividing cells. The ectopic folding coincides in position and timing with the
expansion in the area of dividing cells during mitosis (Figure
@fig:mitotic-domains). The apical area of epithelial cells about to fold
inwards diminishes at the same time that the apical area of dividing cells
increase.

<!--Ectopic folds form by tissue buckling rather than invagination-->

The process of ectopic fold formation differs from the cephalic furrow
invagination. While the cephalic furrow forms by a progressive invagination,
the ectopic folds form by abrupt buckling of the tissue (Figure
@fig:buckling-process). The ectopic folds can be initiated by reminiscent
initiator cell behavior in btd mutants. In this case, the epithelium bulges,
but does not invaginate, until it buckles with the expansion of area in
dividing cells in the mitotic domains. In other ectopic folds, the epithelium
simply buckles when compressed by adjacent dividing cells. Therefore, even
though ectopic folds might appear similar to the cephalic furrow, the
morphogenetic processes and driving forces giving rise to these folds are
rather different.

## Inhibiting mitotic domains does (not) suppress tissue buckling

To investigate whether mitotic domains are required to cause tissue buckling,
we generated double mutants for btd and stg and eve and stg. We imaged double
mutants and found that without the mitotic domains, the tissue does (not)
buckle. That means that other mechanical forces could be contributing to the
tissue buckling.

## Blocking the germ band extension suppresses tissue buckling in mutants and wild type

We tested whether the elongation of the germ band could be the external force
causing the ectopic  epithelial folds in cephalic furrow mutants. To test that
we physically blocked the germ band extension using laser cauterizations at the
posterior dorsal of the embryo at the onset of gastrulation (Figure
@fig:germband-cauterizations).

We find that when the germ band is mechanically prevented from elongating in
cephalic furrow mutants, the ectopic folds no longer appear in the head-trunk
interface (Figure @fig:germband-cauterizations, Videos). The mitotic domains
and associated apical area expansion occur normally and compress apically
non-dividing cells (Figure @fig:germband-cauterizations, Video). This
response is consistent in both btd and eve mutants (Supplemental figure)

<!--Impact of germ band cauterization in wild type-->

Next, we asked whether the germ band elongation could be contributing to the
invagination of the cephalic furrow by exerting forces on the epithelium in
wild type embryos (see He ventral furrow). To test this hypothesis, we blocked
the germ band elongation in wild type embryos by cauterization prior to
gastrulation.

We found that in embryos with a successful cauterization the cephalic furrow
invagination is about 10% shallower compared to control embryos
(@fig:germband-cauterizations). The cephalic furrow length and germ band
extension show a weak but significant correlation. This indicates the physical
force exerted by the germ band extension also contributes to the cephalic
furrow invagination in normal embryogenesis, suggesting the cephalic furrow
morphogenesis is governed by the orchestration of genetic patterning with
mechanical forces in the embryo.

<!--Model shows expansion combined with compression is important-->

To understand the interplay of epithelial forces at the head-trunk boundary in
vivo, we developed an in silico model. Modelling the tissue forces and
compressions we obtain ectopic folding in variable stochastic positions, and
the tissue only buckles when the expansion of apical area is coordinated with
external forces from the germ band (@fig:germband-cauterizations).

# Discussion

## Cephalic furrow cryptic mutants due to ectopic folding

The cephalic furrow has not been as studied as other morphogenetic movements in
Drosophila gastrulation. Only a few cephalic furrow mutants have been
identified and the mechanisms of patterning and morphogenesis remain
understudied to this day. Part of the reason is that the cephalic furrow is a
transient structure and to identify mutant phenotypes one has to image its
formation, since there are no known consequences of not forming the cephalic
furrow. Therefore, live-imaging is a key approach to be able to investigate the
cephalic furrow formation.

Using live-imaging, we found that cephalic furrow mutants with a delayed furrow
in fact fail to form the invagination, but still form a ectopic fold at the
canonical cephalic furrow position. We describe this for gt and there are
likely other genes that might be affecting the cephalic furrow development, but
are cryptic because it requires live-imaging.

## The head-trunk boundary is a shear zone prone to epithelial instability

Our tissue flow suggest that the head-trunk interface is characterized by a
boundary of tissue movements. The forces involved are a relatively static head
tissues that undergo expansion due to mitotic domains, and an anterior and
ventral flow of trunk tissues driven by the germ band elongation.
The invaginated area analysis suggests some sort of compensation in the amount
of invaginated tissue. Suggesting that mechanical forces acting in the
monolayer epithelia, such as the expansion of dividing cells, or the
compression exerted by the germ band, might be causally connected to the tissue
buckling.

## Ectopic folding is facilitated by mitotic domains but ultimately driven by germ band elongation

This indicates the germ band extension is the driving force underlying the
ectopic epithelial folding, and that mitotic domains facilitate but are not
sufficient to cause the tissue to buckle. By cauterization experiments we show
the germ band extension causes epithelial compression at the head-trunk
boundary. While in strong phenotypes, embryos that fail to initiate the furrow,
the compression results in ectopic folds, in wild type embryos the compression
further deepens the furrow. This shows evidence of the long range global impact
the germ band extension exerts during gastrulation.

## Cephalic furrow invagination anticipates and primes folding position

Therefore, the role that the cephalic furrow appears to accomplish during
gastrulation is to anticipate these conflicts and prime, in a predictable
manner, the position that the tissue will fold. In doing so, the cephalic
furrow would prevent potential defects associated with erratic buckling, such
as the compromise of cell-to-cell interactions or short-range signaling in the
epithelia, and thus ensure a stereotypical balance of forces required for the
precise patterning of embryonic tissues during gastrulation.

## Cephalic furrow morphogenesis requires coordination of genetic and mechanical processes

The cephalic furrow invagination is the combination of an active movement
initiated by the initiator cells pulling the tissue in around 40 ¬µm wide, as
supported by the laser ablation experiments. The invagination is further
deepened by the tissue compressing caused by the germ band elongation onto the
head-trunk region, as supported by the cauterization experiments in wild type
and mutants.

Therefore, the cephalic furrow morphogenesis is a two-step process combining an
active genetically defined process with a passive mechanically based process.
That is why is kind of rare to find cephalic furrow mutants and when they are
identified they always form a fold anyway, because only the first step of the
process has been genetically disrupted while the mechanical part of the process
caused by the germ band was not.

## Conclusions

Altogether, the results originating from this project contribute to a more
comprehensive understanding of the complex genetic and physical interactions
involved in the patterning and morphogenesis of the cephalic furrow in
Drosophila.

The data then reveals how this balance flow between genetic and mechanical
parameters integrate and interact with each other during gastrulation. Giving
insight into the connection between genetic and physical parameters that
control morphogenesis.

# Methods

## Fly stocks

btd^XA^, eve^3^, prd^4^, GAP43, ICMT.

## Live-imaging

Coverslip mounting, Z.1 imaging, Luxendo, MZ2.

## Image processing and analyses

ImageJ macros, imsane projections, matlab, ilastik, R, Python, Fiji, Inkscape.

# Acknowledgements

LoPaTs, Akanksha, Vlado, Lemke, LMF, EMBO.

\pagebreak

# Figures

![Ectopic folds in *btd* and *eve* mutants. Timing of ectopic folds compared to sibling control. Morphology of ectopic folds.](../2-figures/ectopic-folding/figure.png){#fig:ectopic-folding width=100%}

![Analyses of ectopic fold formation. Dynamics, total folded area, fold depth and variability between mutant embryos.](../2-figures/ectopic-variability/figure.png){#fig:ectopic-variability width=100%}

![Position of ectopic folds in relation to mitotic domains.](../2-figures/mitotic-domains/figure.png){#fig:mitotic-domains width=100%}

![Ectopic folds in *stg* *btd* and *stg* *eve* double mutants.](../2-figures/placeholder.png){#fig:double-mutants width=100%}

![Cauterization experiments to block the germ band extension.](../2-figures/germband-cauterizations/figure.png){#fig:germband-cauterizations width=100%}

![Cephalic furrow primes folding preventing epithelial instability. Germ band contributes to cephalic furrow invagination.](../2-figures/placeholder.png){#fig:double-mutants width=100%} 

<!--Additional figures:

- Dynamics of tissue buckling in ectopic folds (kymograph or speed tracks)
- Morphology of ectopic folds (local curvature, cell shapes, etc)

-->

\pagebreak

# Videos

<!--TODO: Include eve mutant too-->
![Video 1: Formation of ectopic folds in *btd* mutants.](../2-figures/ectopic-folding/video1.png){width=50%}

<!--TODO: Include eve mutant too-->
<!--TODO: Replace video with the correct one-->
![Video 2: Formation of ectopic folds in *btd* mutants in profile view.](../2-figures/ectopic-folding/video2.png){width=50%}

<!--TODO: Video eve cauterization lightsheet-->
<!--TODO: Video non-dividing cells in eve cauterized-->
<!--TODO: Video tissue buckling en-face and profile view-->

\pagebreak

# References
