# *sloppy paired* controls the cephalic furrow position in *Drosophila*

# Abstract

The cephalic furrow is a major morphogenetic process in Drosophila
gastrulation. However, the cascade of genetic interactions that regulate the
patterning and morphogenesis of this invagination have not been resolved. While
btd is required for eve expression in stripe 1, it does not regulate the
position of eve stripe 1, where the initiator cells will form the cephalic
furrow. Here we show that the repressor activity of sloppy-paired is required
for the proper positioning of the cephalic furrow along the anteroposterior
axis. slp acts upstream of btd, interacting with eve at the onset of zygotic
activation and restricting eve anterior expression. The cephalic furrow
formation in slp mutants is delayed and displaced anteriorly. This anterior
shift is followed by a correspondent shift in the molecular patterning of eve
stripe 1, without changes in the relative position between btd and eve, which
still overlap. slp is expressed in stripes of cells adjacent to the initiator
cells, as well as at the outer edges of the invagination. The initiator cell
cell behavior in slp is different than wild type, suggesting that slp identity
is important to a normal invagination process. Our work bring a more
integrative view of the genetic interactions that pattern the cephalic furrow
formation in Drosophila.

# Results

## slp and eve demarcate the head-trunk boundary early

I analyzed the colocalization of slp, eve and btd expression from the onset of
zygotic activation until gastrulation.

I discovered that slp and eve are expressed early in broad juxtaposing domains
that demarcate the head and trunk regions of the embryo, respectively, while
btd is upregulated at a later stage exactly at the interface between the slp
and eve territories.

![Early slp and eve territories demarcate the head-trunk
boundary. Whole-mount HCR in situs for slp1, eve and btd from the earliest
zygotic expression.](../2-figures/early-boundary.png){#fig:early-boundary width=100%}

## slp is expressed in cells adjacent to the initiator cells

The juxtaposing domains of slp and eve progressively resolve into narrow
abutting stripes that correspond to the single row of initiator cells giving
rise to the cephalic furrow.

![Overlap of btd-eve resolves to a single row of initiator
cells. Whole-mount HCR in situs for slp1, eve and btd showing the narrowing of
expression domains until the single row of initiator
cells.](../2-figures/furrow-onset.png){#fig:furrow-onset width=100%}

## Cephalic furrow position and stripe 1 patterning is shifted anterior in slp mutants

In embryos lacking functional slp genes, the cephalic furrow invagination is
delayed and shifted anteriorly, leading to an abnormal proportion of head and
trunk regions.

![slp phenotype of shifted and delayed
furrow.](../2-figures/slp-phenotype.png){#fig:slp-adjacent width=100%}

By analyzing the expression of key cephalic furrow genes in slp mutants, I
found that the typical overlap between the buttonhead (btd) domain and
even-skipped (eve) stripe 1 was intact, but shifted forward.

![Overlap of btd-eve and cephalic furrow are shifted anteriorly
in slp mutants. Whole mount HCR in situs showing the shift of btd-eve overlap
with close-up detailed, and the quantifications for the relative furrow
position in movies of slp mutants.](../2-figures/slp-mutant.png){#fig:slp-mutant
width=100%}

## slp identity linked to intercellular adhesion of adjacent cells

I found evidence that slp contributes to the normal behavior of initiator cells
at the onset of gastrulation.

In wild type embryogenesis, the rows immediately anterior and posterior to the
initiator cells express slp and are tightly coupled during the invagination
process.

![Initiator cells are bound by prd-slp adjacent
cells. Outer invagination area is demarcated by slp
stripes. Whole mount HCR in situs showing the relative expression between eve
initiator cells and prd and slp in the adjacent cells and outer edges defined
by slp stripes](../2-figures/invagination-map.png){#fig:invagination-map width=100%}

In slp mutants, however, the intercellular adhesion between initiator and
adjacent cells is affected, suggesting that a slp might also play a role in the
patterning of cell identities within the cephalic furrow.

![Adjacent cells phenotype in slp
embryos.](../2-figures/slp-adjacent.png){#fig:slp-adjacent width=100%}

In addition, slp demarcates the outer limits of the cephalic furrow
invagination, but we do not know if it has a functional role in stopping the
mechanical push from the germ band.

# Discussion

## Early slp activity controls the final cephalic furrow position 

My data suggests that slp activity is required for the proper positioning of
the cephalic furrow along the anteroposterior axis. These data suggest that
early slp and eve interactions act upstream of btd, and ultimately define the
final position of the cephalic furrow invagination. In addition, suggests that
btd function might not be required to specify the cephalic furrow initiator
cells.

# Methods


# Acknowledgements


# References

