# Supplementary data


## btd mutants show initiator cell behaviors

<!--Initiator cell behavior in btd mutant-->

We analyzed the cellular behaviors in cephalic furrow mutants. While eve
mutants show no initiator cell behaviors, we observe reminiscent cell shape
changes in btd mutants. In wild type embryos, the apices of initiator cell are
tightly coupled to the apices of adjacent cells when they begin shortening
(@fig:reminiscent-initiators). The adjacent and neighbor cells form a small
epithelial indentation below the vitelline envelope. The width of this
indentation remains roughly the same during the cephalic furrow invagination.
The cells that sink into the invagination converge at this indentation point.

In btd mutants, known for not having a furrow, show a reminiscent behavior
previously undescribed. btd embryos do not show the tight apical connection
between initiators and adjacent cells, but it does show an epithelial
indentation (@fig:reminiscent-initiators). This indentation is delayed and
wider in relation to the wild type morphogenesis. While the cells shorten in
height, the indentation widens with cells detaching from the vitelline
envelope. Until the two sides of the invagination collapse together and mitotic
divisions occur in the invaginated cells.

<!--TODO: Measure the width of the indentation across time.-->

<!--These data indicates that cell behaviors that occur in wild type cephalic furrow formation are still occurring in btd mutants. This suggests the molecular patterning of surrounding cells are still occurring independent of btd, and that the initiator cell behavior is a coordinated composite of cellular behaviors.-->

![Reminiscent initiator cell behavior in btd
mutants.](../2-figures/reminiscent-initiators.png){#fig:reminiscent-initiators
width=100%}

<!--TODO: Cell shape changes in btd mutant-->

We observe cell shape changes as well. The live-imaging data revealed that btd
mutants exhibit reminiscent initiator cell behaviors at the head-trunk
interface which occur before any of the tissue flows. After the tissue flows,
we see a range of cell shape changes with compression on both sides and a
shearing effect at the boundary.


## Molecular arrangements of btd, eve, prd and gt

<!--TODO: Include slp or not?-->

![Molecular arrangements in the cephalic furrow are
disrupted in btd mutants. Whole mount HCR in situs showing the altered
patterning of eve, slp and prd in the adjacent cells, and the narrower
invagination area between slp-positive cells in the outer
edges.](../2-figures/btd-mutant.png){#fig:btd-mutant width=100%}


