---
title: Cephalic furrow balances germ band extension forces during gastrulation in *Drosophila*
documentclass: article
bibliography: furrow.bib
csl: elife.csl
papersize: a4
fontsize: 12pt
fontfamily: libertine
linestretch: 1
geometry:
- bindingoffset=2mm
- hmargin=25mm
- vmargin=25mm
link-citations: true
colorlinks: true
fignos-warning-level: 0
fignos-cleveref: True
fignos-plus-name: Figure
tablenos-cleveref: True
tablenos-plus-name: Table
...


Bruno C. Vellutini, Marina B. Cuenca and Pavel Tomancak

Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics,
Pfotenhauerstr. 108, 01307 Dresden, Germany.


# Abstract


# Introduction

The head-trunk boundary is an ancient and essential trait for the evolution of
bilaterians.

The head-trunk boundary in Drosophila is demarcated by a deep, but transient,
invagination formed during gastrulation, known as the cephalic furrow.

Despite being a prominent trait, the development of the cephalic furrow remains
poorly understood compared to the other gastrulation movements in Drosophila.

We know relatively little about the genetic interactions that specify this
boundary, about the molecules involved in downstream signaling, about the
morphogenetic processes involved, and about the role that the cephalic furrow
might play during gastrulation.

We investigate the role of the cephalic furrow in Drosophila gastrulation by
analyzing known and newly-identified cephalic furrow mutants under lightsheet
microscopy.

We find that mutants that fail to initiate the furrow show ectopic
epithelial folding at stage 7 when the mitotic domains appear and the germ band
begin to elongate.

Folding events vary between individuals occurring preferably between mitotic
domains, but are ultimately driven by the tissue compression caused by the germ
band extension.

We also find the germ band contributes to the cephalic furrow invagination in
wild type embryos.

Our data suggests that under normal embryogenesis, given the expansions of cell
area of mitotic domains in the head and the epithelial compression of the germ
band elongation in the trunk, the epithelia will inevitably buckle. We estimate
this threshold of “excess” tissue in vivo and in silico.

Therefore, what the cephalic furrow accomplishes during gastrulation is to
prime the timing and position of the folding. The result is a predictable
structure for an inevitable invagination, possibly avoiding the potential
negative effects of erratic epithelial buckling.

Overall, the morphogenesis of the cephalic furrow is a two-step composite
process integrating an active, genetically-defined process of invagination, and
a passive tissue buckling driven by the germ band extension.

# Results

<!--TODO: Put together molecular patterning figure.-->

![Molecular patterning of the cephalic furrow. Whole mount HCR in situs
showing the wild type and disrupted patterning in btd, eve, prd and gt
embryos.](../2-figures/patterning.png){#fig:patterning width=100%}

## The head-trunk boundary is a shear zone

We analyzed the tissue flows and cell shape changes in mutants that fail to
initiate the cephalic furrow. We observe opposite tissue flows from the head
and trunk with a clear boundary region characterized by cells with low
circularity and greater distance to neighbors.

<!--TODO: Tissue flow in btd and eve mutants-->

![Tissue flow and cell shape analysis at the head-trunk boundary interface in
cephalic furrow mutants.](../2-figures/shear-zone.png){#fig:shear-zone width=100%}

<!--TODO: Cell shape changes in btd mutant-->

We observe cell shape changes as well. The live-imaging data revealed that btd
mutants exhibit reminiscent initiator cell behaviors at the head-trunk
interface which occur before any of the tissue flows. After the tissue flows,
we see a range of cell shape changes with compression on both sides and a
shearing effect at the boundary.

<!--TODO: Initiator cell behavior in btd mutant-->

![Reminiscent initiator cell behavior in btd
mutants.](../2-figures/reminiscent-initiators.png){#fig:reminiscent-initiators
width=100%}

![Molecular arrangements in the cephalic furrow are disrupted in btd mutants.
Whole mount HCR in situs showing the altered patterning of eve, slp and prd in
the adjacent cells, and the narrower invagination area between slp-positive
cells in the outer edges.](../2-figures/btd-mutant.png){#fig:btd-mutant
width=100%}

## The cephalic furrow invagination is disrupted in weak phenotypes

The cephalic furrow of prd mutants is delayed but forms at the expected
position in the body axis that matches the eve stripe 1 [@prdpaper]. We
analyzed cell and tissue behaviors in prd mutants. We found that initiator cell
behavior is present, timely and possibly expanded. However, the process of
cephalic furrow invagination does not progress normally. The tissue halts
midway only to buckle abruptly when the mitotic domains appear. Despite the
similar outcome, a cephalic epithelial fold, we note that this fold is not
formed through the usual process of invagination (which is disrupted). We
observe a similar phenomenon in gt mutants.

<!--TODO: ROI showing initiator cell behavior in prd and gt-->

<!--TODO: Plot showing interrupted invagination and subsequent buckling.-->

![Disrupted invagination process in weak cephalic furrow
mutants.](../2-figures/invagination-mutants.png){#fig:invagination-mutants
width=100%}

![Row of initiator cells is wider in prd mutants. Whole mount HCR in situs
showing the disrupted patterning of adjacent cells and wider row of
eve-expressing cells.](../2-figures/prd-mutant.png){#fig:prd-mutant width=100%}

## Cephalic furrow mutants show ectopic epithelial folds

Once the gastrulation progresses, the germ band elongates and mitotic domains
appear in the head epithelia. We found that in btd and eve mutants, the embryos
invariably form ectopic epithelial folds throughout the head-trunk interface
during the process of germ band elongation.

![Ectopic folding in btd and eve
mutants.](../2-figures/ectopic-folding.png){#fig:ectopic-folding width=100%}

We also observe that the folding events are variable between individual
embryos.

![Variability of ectopic folding between individual mutant
embryos.](../2-figures/ectopic-variability.png){#fig:ectopic-variability
width=100%}

Ectopic folds occur preferably between mitotic domains.

![Map of ectopic folds in relation to mitotic
domains.](../2-figures/mitotic-domains.png){#fig:mitotic-domains
width=100%}

We measured the total area of invaginated tissue and total number of
invaginated blastoderm cells. The invaginated area in btd and eve mutants is
roughly half the size of a regular wild type cephalic furrow. Nevertheless the
minimum value of invaginated tissues in mutant embryos did not go below X. We
also observe that individual mutant embryos can have the same total invaginated
area either having one deep fold or two shallower folds.

![Map and measurement of ectopic folding
area.](../2-figures/ectopic-area.png){#fig:ectopic-area width=100%}

## Blocking the germ band extension suppresses ectopic folding in cephalic furrow mutants

We tested whether mitotic domains are sufficient to cause ectopic epithelial
folds by mechanically blocking the germ band elongation in eve mutants using
laser cauterizations. We found that when the germ band is prevented from
elongating, the ectopic folds are no longer formed.

![Cauterization blocking the germ band extension in btd and eve
mutants.](../2-figures/cauterization-mutants.png){#fig:cauterization-mutants
width=100%}

We also tested the impact of blocking the germ band elongation in wild type
embryos. When the germ band extension is blocked, the cephalic furrow
invagination is 30% shallower compared to control embryos.

![Cauterization blocking the germ band extension in wild type
embryos.](../2-figures/cauterization-wildtype.png){#fig:cauterization-wildtype
width=100%}

This indicates the germ band extension also impacts the cephalic furrow
invagination in normal embryogenesis, suggesting the cephalic furrow
morphogenesis is governed by the orchestration of genetic patterning with
mechanical forces in the embryo.

<!--TODO: Injection of cell division inhibitor in mutants-->

**Supplementary:** *Inhibiting cell divisions does not prevent ectopic
buckling.* To test if the mitotic domains are required or only facilitators of
ectopic folding, we inhibited cell divisions in btd and eve mutants by
injecting XXX. We found that the epithelia will buckle anyway, even without
mitotic domains.

<!--TODO: Cauterization of initiator cells to block the cephalic furrow-->

**Supplementary:** *Blocking the cephalic furrow in wild type causes ectopic
buckling.* If an excess of epithelia in association with mitotic domains and
germ band compression, we expect that by blocking the cephalic furrow, we would
find ectopic folding occurring in the epithelia. We blocked the cephalic furrow
invagination by cauterizing the row of initiator cells. We find the prediction
holds.

<!--TODO: Figure with laser ablations around the cephalic furrow area-->

**Supplementary:** *Cephalic furrow invagination actively increases tissue
tension.* Using laser ablations near the initiator cells we identified that
there is an increase in tension in an area of about 40 µm anterior and
posterior.

## Model predicts ectopic folding given mitotic domains and germ band compression in normal embryogenesis

We developed a model to compare to our in vivo observations. The model is in
line with the amount of excess tissue, calculates the force needed for the
epithelia to buckle, and the compression from the germ band driving the
folding.

![Analytical model predicting the interactions between the head-trunk epithelia
and the germ band extension.](../2-figures/math-model.png){#fig:math-model
width=100%}

# Discussion

## The head-trunk boundary is a tissue shear zone

These data suggest that the head-trunk interface is under conflicting forces
and cannot accommodate the expansion of head tissues caused by the mitotic
domains, and the compression of trunk tissues caused by the germ band, without
buckling. 

## Cell proliferation crosses physical threshold for epithelial stability

The invaginated area analysis suggests some sort of compensation in the amount
of invaginated tissue. Suggesting that mechanical forces acting in the
monolayer epithelia, such as the expansion of dividing cells, or the
compression exerted by the germ band, might be causally connected to the tissue
buckling.

## Mitotic domains facilitate but are not sufficient to cause tissue buckling

This indicates the germ band extension is the driving force underlying the
ectopic epithelial folding, and that mitotic domains facilitate but are not
sufficient to cause the tissue to buckle.

## Germ band extension drives compression in the head-trunk boundary

By cauterization experiments we show the germ band extension causes epithelial
compression at the head-trunk boundary. While in strong phenotypes, embryos
that fail to initiate the furrow, the compression results in ectopic folds, in
wild type embryos the compression further deepens the furrow. This shows
evidence of the long range global impact the germ band extension exerts during
gastrulation.

## Cephalic furrow invagination anticipates and primes folding position

Therefore, the role that the cephalic furrow appears to accomplish during
gastrulation is to anticipate these conflicts and prime, in a predictable
manner, the position that the tissue will fold. In doing so, the cephalic
furrow would prevent potential defects associated with erratic buckling, such
as the compromise of cell-to-cell interactions or short-range signaling in the
epithelia, and thus ensure a stereotypical balance of forces required for the
precise patterning of embryonic tissues during gastrulation.

## Cephalic furrow morphogenesis is driven by two independent processes

The cephalic furrow invagination is the combination of an active movement
initiated by the initiator cells pulling the tissue in around 40 µm wide, as
supported by the laser ablation experiments. The invagination is further
deepened by the tissue compressing caused by the germ band elongation onto the
head-trunk region, as supported by the cauterization experiments in wild type
and mutants.

Therefore, the cephalic furrow morphogenesis is a two-step process combining an
active genetically defined process with a passive mechanically based process.
That is why is kind of rare to find cephalic furrow mutants and when they are
identified they always form a fold anyway, because only the first step of the
process has been genetically disrupted while the mechanical part of the process
caused by the germ band was not.

## Conclusions

Altogether, the results originating from this project contribute to a more
comprehensive understanding of the complex genetic and physical interactions
involved in the patterning and morphogenesis of the cephalic furrow in
Drosophila.

The data then reveals how this balance flow between genetic and mechanical
parameters integrate and interact with each other during gastrulation. Giving
insight into the connection between genetic and physical parameters that
control morphogenesis.

# Methods


# Acknowledgements


# References

